[Applause]
good afternoon it's Mike working so when
it came time to put the slides together
for this year we look back at what we've
done for the last couple of years about
two years ago we talked about the
architecture and a bunch of AP is last
year we went through API is again showed
you how to write plug-ins for the print
dialogues so this year we're going to do
something a little different and the
agenda is basically the topics that have
spawned the most amount of email between
developers and us to the various
developer mailing lists over the last
year the topics that have been the most
interesting to discuss with the
developers and in-house hopefully if
you've got a little bit of something for
everybody we've got do's and don'ts for
carbon a little bit of information about
how Coco glues on to the underlying
printing system a little bit on UNIX
printing in the systems and diagnostic
tools and we'll end up talking a little
bit about printing in color before I go
on I want to say thanks to everybody
here who has reported bugs against
printing has been appreciated it's kept
us busy and also thanks for all the
suggestions for improvements which we'll
work on so before we get into this I got
one slide that some of you may have seen
before so hands up all those who've seen
this slide well that's very interesting
because all the printing engineers
didn't put their hands up so that's why
we've got these bugs
so I'm going to explain to the printing
team and some of you very quickly how
the architectures put together mainly so
that you understand the terminology
we're going to use in subsequent slides
and I was thinking of doing this with my
eyes shut because I've done it so many
times before but I'll probably fall off
the stage so we'll start over on the
your left towards the top where your
applications linked against the pudding
framework that's the box we call the
print job creator that serves up all the
api's that are in the two main printing
headers PM core PM application PM
application for the UI related api's PM
core for all the rest those api is let
you set up what we call the page format
object and the print settings object
bring up the print dialog and execute
the print loop and a result of that you
get a print job as a print job is that
PDF spool file shown here and a meta
file we call the job ticket the job
ticket contains most of the settings you
put in you the user does in the print
dialog and a bunch of other things that
are needed for processing the job
downstream underneath that print job
crater is a plug-in print dialog
extensions and those are CF plugins can
be written by application developers by
printer driver developers and they're
written by us in the printing team and
they basically add panels to the page
setup and put dialogues to add features
you know everything from the main panel
and page setup where you pick your paper
size and orientation etc to copies and
page range in the print dialog those are
all all those panels come from these
print dialog extensions moving across we
have the print server print server is
going to think of it about it as the
nerve center of the printing system it's
responsible for sending
print jobs downstream from the print job
creator and relaying status and error
information back up to the UI from the
modules which we'll talk about in a
second
print service its own process and
manages all the cues when a job is ready
to print print server runs process call
the print job manager and it as its name
implies and does everything that's
needed to do to get a job printed runs
these modules over on the right in
separate threads the first one we call
the convertor actually that's a bit of
an oversimplification the converters are
set of libraries that do various things
to do with converting from one graphics
format to another so for example there's
a converter library that turns PDF into
raster data one's going to turn PDF into
PostScript converter is also used up in
the front end of the printing system to
generate the spool file itself so it's
involved in turning quick-draw drawing
into a PDF spool file or quartz 2d
drawing into a PDF spool file next one
down the printer module the printer
module is pretty much the only thing
that's left of classic print drivers
classic print drivers used to do
everything themselves UI spooling
quick-draw conversion choose a pax IO
everything now the system is a lot more
modular printer modules basically all
they have to do these days is tell the
converter what sort of data they want
and once they receive that data package
it appropriately and send it to the
printer so in the case of a raster
printer module it would tell the
converter you know the the color space
and the resolution of the raster data
rate wanted as it received bands from
the converter to compress them insert
some engine control codes and send them
off downstream talking about talking to
the printer that's where the i/o modules
come in those are today mainly written
by Apple we have an i/o module for Apple
talk printing for LPR printing for USB
the list can go on we'll probably add to
it also third parties can add to it down
the bottom printer browsers those
provide the UI for the i/o modules to
basically provide the UI for discovering
printers so there's one for
using the NBP protocol to discover
appletalk printers one scans the USB bus
looking for printers and those printer
browse the modules are actually loaded
by the last box on this slide which is
print Center which is the application
that presumably everybody's used the
application that's used for setting up
print queues monitoring and managing
print jobs so that's the architecture in
a nutshell the one thing I'd like to say
is it's a lot more modular than whatever
we used to have in Mac OS 9 and 8 and
earlier versions it's a lot more
extensible and our goal is that
hopefully we're partially achieving that
is that if you're in the business of
writing printer drivers or even if
you're in the business of running
applications to do a lot of printing
Apple's done a lot more work for you
than youth than was the case in the past
ok so back onto the agenda we're going
to talk a little bit about carbon
printing and we've got to cover both
printing from carbon apps running on Mac
OS 8 and 9 under carbon lib as well as
carbon apps running on 10 and you're
probably aware the printing system
underneath those two environments is
very different that raises some issues
and that's why we need to talk about
some of them here my first slide here is
probably exactly the same as one I had
last year although I didn't check the
message is use the API so take a session
argument as opposed to their
counterparts which don't if you're
familiar with the headers you'll see
there about it was about 40 api's where
there's a non session and a session
version and it sounds a bit crazy
there's a historical reason behind that
originally the non session api's
appeared because we were doing the
carbon thing trying to minimize the
effort of for developers bringing
applications over to carbon so the API
to them basically intended to match the
classic printing manager and just
provide a lot of access to functions for
things that used to be in the print
record and then somebody had the bright
idea to have document mobile printing
intent so we had to
have some sort of context to carry
around with a lot of these api's as a
result we decided to come up with a
parallel set of api's which take a
session parameter and that way we can
manage printing within an application
pretty involved all documents and
concurrently so our favorite API so the
session ones those are the ones we'll
carry forward
if you're using the non session ones
we're likely ask you to switch over to
the session ones what you've probably
noticed in the last CSS we've added new
api's their session only that's one way
of coercing you into doing the right
thing putting up here and notice they we
will deprecated the non session ones
eventually
not this year but soon and all of sudden
sample code uses a session api's a
couple of technical restrictions one is
that when you're running on 8 & 9 you
limit it to a single session and that's
just because of the nature the
underlying printing system with you know
the print dialog being system modal for
example so you have to check your
environment at runtime if you're running
on 8 & 9 under Carbon lib limit yourself
to one session on 10 you know as many as
you like
every window can have its own print
dialog for example if you are using
multiple sessions you should be aware of
the fact that the page format and print
settings objects can be shared amongst
those sessions pretty much the only
limitation but an obvious one is that
each session can only have one print
dialog up as at any particular time so
somewhat related to that is using sheets
for your print dialogues and you can't
do this on page 9 but you can definitely
do it on 10 and we want you to do it on
10 you want it to be the standard user
experience for printing actually not all
Apple applications do it right now and
they should so hopefully that will
happen quite soon obvious benefits of
the dialogues appearing as sheets is
that they're they're putting controls
always in a predictable place relative
to the document window and the other
nice thing is that you can the user can
switch from
you know one window to another from one
application to another the dialogues no
longer modal so either the application
of the system the two api's they're up
there if you're running at runtime you
want to check your environment before
you start using p.m. session new sheets
because you can't do this thing online
even though you can bring up a print
dialog for each open document window
whether or not you want to spool
multiple documents in parallel is up to
you can be tricky if you're a quick-draw
based application you've got to
carefully coordinate your use of
printing ports there's actually a
limitation on cocoa apps at the moment
because the spooling dialogue is modal
but we'll get rid of that in a future
release I'm sure so you can print
multiple documents or spool multiple
documents in parallel but be a little
careful on that I mentioned that carbon
lib printing you don't get sheets
basically you get the classic drivers
print dialogues and I've got this bully
datum on several slides we have got
sample codes in the posted online
documentation so I'm gonna develop a CD
it's a little out of date now we are
improving it until we can get another
developer CD out we are actually going
to provide more sample go to DTS and so
DTS will be able to post this sample
code hopefully quite soon another UI
related thing is how do you extend the
print dialog when I say print dialog I
mean the page setup and print dialogues
and message here is to write these print
dialog extensions instead of using the
old append little mechanism append it
all was the way in which you used to
extend the print dialog back on all the
versions of the OS using p.m. dialog in
it and main calls and little kludgy you
really had no control over how you can
lay out your controls for whatever
prints print specific features you had
what you can do with PD ease is the
you can have if you like multiple panels
added to the print dialog all the page
setup dialog for that matter lay them
out exactly as you like so it's a lot
more powerful the only restriction is
the p d--'s are only supported on ten a
couple of things to dimension in
connection with PDEs is that you can
you're welcome to write p d--'s and add
any features you like but we would
definitely like you to talk to us before
you start doing that you don't have to
register PDEs because they are plugins
they use the UUID mechanism so they're
all sort of by definition we unique but
would rather you didn't write a PD for a
feature that you know deep down is
something that Apple should do and if
you're an application developer would
rather you didn't write a PDE for a
feature that really should belong to the
printer should be supplied by the
printer module and vice versa or if
you're developing through the modules
410 we don't want you putting features
in that really should be provided by
Apple or maybe your application specific
so you're very welcome to run your ideas
by us and we'll give you some advice
we'll certainly tell you if we're
planning to write a PDE for a feature
that you think you need and we're
acutely aware of the fact that there are
some that we should write an ad and
we're working on that so patience is
always appreciated I should mention in
connection with PDE s that we strongly
encourage you to think about the UI
design and the layout to you know follow
apples example if you're a printer
module you may be very tempted to make
your UI look exactly like your print
dialogues on Mac OS 9 or 8 or haven't
appeared on some other platform and we
strongly encourage you not to do that to
take a step back look at how things look
at how things look on Mac OS 10 and fit
in with that certainly users don't want
to
see any inconsistency as they switch
between one panel and another or between
one printer and another so same applies
to application developers you might want
to do some things that look just like
your application printing extensions on
8:00 or 9:00 but try to do the accurate
thing if you can and certainly we're
here to give you advice if you have any
questions about that let's see
so if you're an application developer
and you've added a panel for the print
dialog you want to know what the user
did in that panel so the two routines
down here are used for that purpose your
plugin is going to call PM session set
data in session and you can use the get
call to fish that out and then your
application main line code is going to
know what it needs to do in the print
loop again sample code from pts one
small thing that's probably worth
mentioning is that you do have a choice
when you're building your PDEs as to
whether to build them as pair for marco
code even if you're a CFM app there's
glue code from DTS so it's your choice
it's perfectly doable and I think it's
certainly something we need to look into
more closely but I think you can even
use IB to build your PDEs I know of one
developer who managed to do that
okay now plug for few ap is that we
certainly use in our sample code is it
not exactly taking at random but there
are a lot of api's in PM core PM
application some of them have rather
specialized purposes others hopefully
are obvious why you should use them but
there's a lot of API so may not be
obvious which ones you should use here
so here are a few that we encourage you
to use all the time first one PM set
your name CF string is function you
should call to name your print job by
default if you don't call this routine
will will get the window title and use
that
but their applications that don't
necessarily have windows or have
multiple windows and do strange things
at print time so this is a great way of
providing a user-friendly meaningful
name that name will be displayed by
Print Center in the queue window it'll
be displayed as a default filename if
you're printing the disk we'll put it in
a job title comment in PostScript files
we generate news in various other places
so please use that routine P and set
page range is quite a useful API as well
you use it basically to tell our copies
and pages panel how to limit the from
two fields when the users typing in the
pages they want to print you can use
this in connection with another routine
p.m. set last page to prime the print
dialog so you can actually tell the user
what the first page and what the last
pages are in the document and it
prevents people you know typing crazy
numbers in there and then your
application has to deal with that in the
print loop PM session error you really
need to use this in your print loop and
you ought to be made you have to make
sure that you always call it before the
begin page function and if you do detect
an error with this routine don't bail
immediately what you should do is you
make sure you call the end document
routine that allows us to clean up any
memory we've allocated and then you can
safely get out of the print loop just
post your error message if you need to
and exit cleanly you should use p.m.
session set error within the print loop
to set your own error codes or our
conditions that will be picked up after
that page has been processed by p.m.
session error PM session set error is
the way you register your sort of
application specific error conditions
that you encountered while trying to
draw your pages obviously you don't want
to use it for is to overlap any of the
error codes we returned from the PM
functions so try to use those routines
and we always use them in our sample
code
so how many people remember the original
articles called the perils of postscript
10 11 years old I mean years old they
were written okay written by a guy
called Z Z Zimmerman whose I think the
originator the dog cow pretty famous guy
in this time and I'm certainly not
trying to emulate what he did which is a
lot better than what I'm doing today but
if we're talking about some of the
tricky aspects of mixing postscript with
quick-draw when you're printing I mean
historically every application that's
had moderate to sophisticated drawing
requirements or capabilities has had to
resort to PostScript at print time
obviously if you're only printing to a
postive printer as quick to already
won't cut it
you know for things like smooth shading
etc so for a long time application
developers have been using pet comments
and settings sniff it's a postscript or
huge chunks of PostScript in their pics
pool files and getting to know the
idiosyncrasies of different versions of
print drivers etc we've recognized that
the folks who've written these sort of
applications probably got a lot of code
they need to bring over to ten they
can't do it immediately and we'd
obviously like you to go towards the PDF
imaging model but in the meantime we do
have what we call the laser ivory
compatibility path imprinting so you can
tell the printing system that you want
to pick with PostScript spool file
instead of a PDF full file these are the
two routines you use to do that you call
p.m. session get document format
generation to get back a list of spool
file formats that are supported and
obviously you've got to call this after
the print dialog spin just nest because
before that nobody knows that what the
target printer is and whether it's the
PostScript printer so call it after the
print dialog has been dismissed you get
back a list the list will always contain
PDF as a sported spool file format and
maybe it's going to contain pictures
PostScript if the target printer
supposed to a printer having discovered
that you can then call PM session set
document format generation parsley and
pick with PostScript is your preferred
format
and basically from that point on when
you when you draw your pages in the
print loop you can use pick comments and
insert your own PostScript there is
sample code already in on the developer
CD and it's not bad but I think we got a
better version coming out very soon and
going through DTS so those are routines
you should use there's a routine that's
in PM core called PM is PostScript
driver it might sound like it does the
same thing it doesn't it just tells you
whether the current printer basically
tell us about the current printer ease
laserwriter rate or whether the current
printer on agent 9 though it's W do
field is 3 so you could use it on 8 and
9 to see if you're printing to it those
are a great or WPS but don't try to use
it on 10 for this purpose so having told
the printing system you want to generate
your own closed script these are the 5
pick comment routines you can use to put
your PostScript
in I say be careful with postscript
anybody's doing this stuff already knows
why you have to be careful it's only
designed for inserting PostScript in
page drawing to supplement what you're
already doing with quick-draw be careful
especially be careful about assuming
about existence of resources like font
resources etc the space ax does still
work but if you've got code that is
currently compatible with laser a great
it's going to be compatible with this
method of printing on 10 there used to
be a mechanism to send your own
PostScript procedures down with the
print job goes by the name of the P rec
103 mechanism it's a resource you have
in your application that's the way in
which you get your own PostScript into
the header or into the document page set
up sections of the print job you can
still use P rec 103 but there's a much
better API and mechanism for doing it
and that is
sessions that post script injection data
routine and it's documented and it's NPM
core today basically you provide a
dictionary of key value pairs the keys
are tags into the post script job and
the values that sniff it's a post script
you want us to insert at specific places
gives you fine control over the post
script job you generate we still
obviously have to be careful about what
you're doing but it's a lot better than
P rec 1 & 3 and you should use it if you
are forced to use the load arrival rate
compatibility path 1:10 a couple of
disadvantages for obvious disadvantages
of using all this stuff the first thing
is the preview which the preview app we
use for previewing school files can
handle PDF but we don't have a
postscript rip in the system so if
you're doing the PostScript printing
path on 10 you can't preview your
documents what's more if you're doing
this one day we'll support drag and drop
in Print Center and you'll be able to
drag spool files from one print queue to
another or documents onto queues for
example and you can't drag a postscript
spool file onto a queue for a raster
printer because we can't render
PostScript so use this stuff if you need
to if it's a short term solution for
getting onto ten but go to the graphics
and imaging Tips & Tricks session
tomorrow morning at nine o'clock where
my colleagues sitting in the front row
there it's going to tell you a lot more
about quick-draw and quartz 2d and I
think you find the information you get
out of there really shows you a much
better way of doing sophisticated
printing on 10 then the old quick-draw
and postcode round now for a topic that
is generated a ton of email a lot of bug
reports actually we've put a lot of bug
fixes in Carbon live the issue is how we
get routines like p.m. set get scaling
resolution orientation etc to work
accurately when you're printing through
carbon Live
Mac OS 89 and the issue is that
different print drivers classic rent
drivers do you store things in different
places encoded in different ways in the
print record and actually it's worse
than that
I mean they they interpret the data in
in unpredictable ways run into a driver
recently where if zero was the scaling
factor that meant 100% scaling so it's
difficult for us algorithmically to
figure out how to deal with all these
different print drivers print records so
what we've done and we've been doing
this for the last year or so we've been
encouraging printer driver developers to
help us create this database which we
call the p dot database that's inside a
carven live it contains information that
tells us for these various settings like
copies and orientation you know the
offset into the print record the size
bit bars to separate the parameter from
its neighbors and some information to
handle the interpretation of the setting
you know enumerator types like page
orientation or scalars but about the
decimal point for things like scaling
and resolution so it's pretty good
there's about 40 feet ATS in comminuted
a covers about 250 or drivers but there
are other drivers out there and you'll
probably encounter them or your
customers will encounter them and
they'll complain and you tell us and
we'll talk to the driver developer and
we'll add another P dot that's the way
it works and in the meantime code
defensively it's just as bad as the
situation when you would printing
directly to those drivers on 8:09 you
know last year or the year before so
it's a compatibility problem we're
working on it it's getting better but we
certainly appreciate you know your
support and bug reports just just fine
way of doing it similarly some of our
routines like the ones listed here use
the pr general function again under
carbon Lib against the classic drivers
and for those to work reliably we need
that driver to support the various
opcodes associated videos phone
if the driver doesn't support that
opcode the only thing we can do is
return KPM not implemented and you have
to deal with that again it's no worse
than the situation ever was but the
message is if you are printing through
carbon they'd be careful because there
are some drivers out there that we don't
know how to handle yet all right
probably going to trip over myself on
this one they'll try to talk about some
page and paper rect issues so first of
all terminology the formatting printer
is the printer you see in the page setup
dialog on 10 we are gently trying to
educate users that when they format a
document it's not necessarily going to
be printed to the same printer that they
format it for and it might well be
printed to a variety of printers so
we've introduced this entry in the pop
up called any printer which we call the
generic printer the idea is that these
are actually the user who doesn't care
isn't even going to bring this dialogue
up and they'll never see anything that
but when the page format object is
created will create it for this generic
printer which has associated with it a
set of standard papers and a set of a
safe margins if you if you go into the
page setup dialog you can pick another
printer one of the printers that you see
if you set up and print Center and you
can pick a specific paper size supported
by your printer and you will get
courtesy of the printer module
downstream exact margins for that
selected paper size but the important
thing is that whatever you format your
document for is quite separate from what
happens when you decide to print that
document so the formatting for printer
is totally independent of the printer
entry that you see in the print dialog
and it's a little bit of a leap of well
so it's a change of model for some users
but we feel that it's a sensible step in
the right direction
so the current and the default printers
those only those are only relevant in
the context of printing as in the print
dialog when you bring the print dialog
up for the first time the printer pop up
will always contain the name of the
default printer the default printer is
the print II set in print center
typically that's the last printer you
set up and if you fiddle with the pop up
you can change the printer entry so
you're changing at that point the
current printer so there are cases where
you will format for one printer and
print to another and that's fine I mean
we've got this nice PDF imaging model we
can handle mapping you know the document
to different paper sizes the default
behaviour right now is we clip but we'll
we'll provide some more functionality to
allow people to do things like scale and
Center their pages on the paper but the
main thing for people to come to terms
with is the fact that formatting for
printer is very different from the
current printer that you see in the
print dialog let's see what else to say
about that you can't you can't change
there's no programmatic way of changing
the default printer that is the users
decision the user can do that through
Print Center today you can't change the
current printer it's Roni api's but we
do recognize that there are some
applications that want to do this sort
of thing if you're writing a printer
utility for example you might want to do
it so here are a couple api's p.m.
session create printer list and PM
session set current printer which
respectively will give you a list of the
printers that you see in print center
and they will let you change the current
printer they're not available today they
will be available in some future release
and I think if you write to DTS and a
week or so from now they'll be able to
provide you with some details again you
can't use them today but if you are
trying to do functionality that requires
access to the printer
we do have a solution for you the other
thing I need to say we're a bit of a
confession really is that the page setup
dialog doesn't exactly work the way it's
supposed to in ten point O or ten point
oh one two and three but we are fixing
it I'm sure you've noticed if you go to
the page setup dialog pick a printer
pick a paper size okay the dialog and
then come back to it later it doesn't
appear that the settings have stuck so
we are very well aware of that problem
and we have I think it's safe to say we
fixed it so you'll be getting those
fixes hopefully quite soon a few words
about paper and pages and the first
thing I have to say in connection with
these routines that are generally used
by applications that are trying to
format a document that maybe have come
from another platform or the informative
or another printer without using the
page setup dialog these routines you
have to be very careful about using them
on eight and nine because there's no
programmatic way on eight or nine to
tell the driver what to put in it well
to put different our paper our page
settings into the print record without
going through the drivers page setup
dialog so the api's are they're using
carefully on 8 and 9 they do work on 10
as advertised or as expected so you
really you have a lot more control over
your paper and page racks on 10 if
you're going to print without the UI you
can do that and you've got reasonable
amount of control over margins the last
bullet item here is extremely important
before you call any of the get functions
to get the page rect for example always
make sure you call the validate call
after any set call to set orientation
set scales that resolutions set pay per
page right because that's the only time
we sync everything up in fact we're even
fixing a few bugs in that routine so we
will get it right very soon
so that's pretty much all I've got now
for carbon just to recap
do use the session api's display your
print dialog the sheets on 10 develop
your own PDEs go to tomorrow morning
session look for teas in course 2d
instead of mixing up quick draw and
PostScript and program defensively when
you're running in hol on 8 & 9 on carbon
live we do our best compatibility is
getting better but be aware of some of
the issues we face now we're going to
switch horses for a moment to talk a
little bit about cocoa printing but I'm
not gonna do just tell you what to do in
your application because there's a
session straight after this advanced
cocoa topics in Hall 2 and there's a lot
more information there so I encourage
you to go to that session if you're a
cocoa app developer and want to know a
bit more about how to do printing right
what I'm going to talk about is the
relationship between the applique
printing classes there's only four of
them that are really relevant for
printing and the underlying printing
system so we're just going to go through
these classes fairly quickly I'll just
try to explain how they map to each
other the first one and it's print info
if you're looking at a sprint info look
at the online documentation or look at
the code itself you'll see it's a
dictionary that contains all the
settings that usually associated with a
page setup and print dialog so in theory
it maps directly to our page format and
print settings objects
it's a cocoa application you
automatically get a shared and it's
print info object this there's always
the notion of a cut of a current one
that's used for the current print
operation you can create multiple
instances of it there are access to
functions for the various things that
are stored in a nice print info although
most of them are changed by bringing up
a dialog the page setup and print
dialogues the thing that we need to do
we need to sink and it's print info a
little bit more closely with page
forward and print settings because
there's a couple of things in a sprint
info that aren't supported by the
underlying printing system we need to
take care of that and vice versa there's
a couple of things that we have in the
underlying print system that aren't in
in a sprint info it's a few things like
an S print infos got some fax settings
which we don't carry through downstream
the underlying printing systems got
settings for things like print quality
modes and and things like that so we'll
be thinking those two up and it's page
layout basically that's the page setup
dialog and you really don't have to do a
lot a lot of coding with and it's page
layout it it basically accesses an S
printing process things like the paper
size and there is scaling orientation
for the document the one thing I want to
point out is that you can invoke it in
two ways you can invoke is the modal
dialog and you can invoke it as a sheet
so you'll know which one you should do
one thing I could have mentioned is that
you can extend the page setup dialog in
a cocoa app but very few applications
that need to do that and it's print
panel which is a print dialog obviously
you can do the same thing you can add an
accessory view and it's sort of
equivalent to print dialog extensions
for carbon applications you can add a
view put your application in specific
print settings in it
the only restriction today with cocoa
abscess that you're going to have one
access review well I'm sure we'll work
on that and enable you to have more if
you need them and actually if you need
to do that sort of thing I think you
should tell Apple so we understand the
priority for that and obviously and it's
print panel sets of things you known as
print info that you see in the dialogues
like copies and page range etc and last
to know
I know his least is an S print operation
where all the good stuff happens we're
in all down the file menu hit print you
create an S printing for print operation
that
takes a copy of Anna's print info brings
the print dialog up merges the results
back in tennis print info and then it's
up tennis view to do all the real work
and as few draws all the pages goes into
the school file a PDF spool file and
that spool file goes through the rest of
the printing system just like any other
print job maybe from other koko apps or
from other carbonate basically that's it
there's very little for you to worry
about for koko printing and it's the
details in the next session there's a
little bit of work for us to do to more
tightly think the applicant classes up
to our underlying data structures but it
works pretty well today now for the
power of printing sorry the power of
UNIX and printing so we don't expect a
lot of consumers to do printing from the
command line but maybe some of you guys
in this room will want to do that
occasionally so you can the LPR family
is in the bsp layer and LPR works just a
couple of things to mention today LPR
and this associated tools like LPC lb ql
PRM etc they work but they're not really
well integrated with the rest of the
printing system in other words for
example when you say LPR - P want to
type in your printer name you can type
in necessarily any of the print queue
names that you see in print Center the
only exceptions of that is that you can
use printer entries that sort in net
info so you can put net info printer
entries in when you're lpr printing the
other thing of course with LPR is that
you don't get user-friendly status and
error messages if anything goes wrong
and you're limited in the file types you
can print generally text and postcode
files work well and I was not so well so
help you I worked but there's actually a
better tool
and if you haven't found it already it's
just called the print tall it's in user
s bin
the difference is that the print tall is
actually integrated with the rest of the
printing system so when you specify your
printer you can specify any printer Q
name that you see in print Center you
can for example print PDF files to
raster printers using the printer
there's an N up flag you can use - nu so
you can print your files to up for up
etc so and and once you've printed you
can see that your jobs in the queues
along with everything else if I print
Center so if you want to do command line
printing print is a little better than
LPR at the moment
LPD is in the system obviously it's used
when you print through LPR it's not it's
not set up by default to enable remote
printing but you can do that so if you
know what you're doing you can edit the
config files and you can run the LPD you
may be from a startup script and other
clients on the land can print to your LP
d.school are running on your system -
whatever printers you're set up for so
LPD works it's not our long-term
solution for print sharing but it's
there I mentioned a moment ago net info
something you may not know is whenever
you set up an LPR printer in Princeton
until we actually create a local net
info entry I'm not gonna get into net in
focus I'm definitely not the right
person to talk about it but that's net
info is a very convenient way of making
suddenly making LPR printers available
to everybody on the network without them
having to know their domain names or IP
addresses or anything like that but you
can't use Print Center to create global
net info entries or node info entries
that are exported to hire network
domains you have to use that info
manager to do that and you have to be
appropriately privileged to be able to
create Network wide
and that info things so you can do it if
you're going to create a printer entry
the print Catman page tells you about
the keys that you have to put in you
have to be careful there I mean we have
to know you have to be exactly right
when you specify the name of the printer
on the name of the machine that's
running LPD for example one instance
there which I'm flagging there's a key Y
key which we use the value associated
with that we use to find the PPD file
for the PostScript printer associated
with that net info entry and and that
infos limited in the byte codes it can
accept it doesn't like forward slashes
and spaces for example some PPD files
may have those in the filename so if
you're going to put the PPD name in the
entry you can replace those slashes and
spaces with an underscore so some
subtleties there I'm sure DTS can can
handle questions on it but it's a nice
way of making your printers available to
everybody on the network so it's demo
time so it's Phil Schiller here yeah ok
so I'll do the demo
[Applause]
well we're already running terminal it's
going to be a very exciting demo so
exciting that I think a lot of people
may want to leave now
all right so we're running top over here
just so that you can see what's going on
not much happening right now though
we've got four incidental running down
here let me say a few words about Cpl
util first of all it's a tool that was
written a while back when we're
developing the printing system
it was developed it was written for
internal uses originally but it's become
quite useful for you know for people who
are doing print testing people to trying
to troubleshoot print jobs especially
for printer driver developers but if
you're feeling brave and you're having a
printing problem Cpl util is great way
of finding out if for example print
queues that got corrupted in some way
when a job fails whether a how far the
print job got through the pipeline so
I'm going to show you a little bit about
Cpl detail but by no means give you a
comprehensive walkthrough so so if we go
to developer tools
we'll see oops where are we
Oh CD course this requested I can type
see a bunch of things in there that
apple provides the don't understand at
bsd set but there's Cpl util so we can
can run
Cpl util and first off get ready for the
scrolling we can see all the things that
Cpl util does we're not going to try
many of these commands but here's one
that we can do show work set printers is
a command we can use in Cpl util to see
what print queues we've set up so
we can do this and we can see oh I don't
have any print use so let's go to well
before we do that and let's get Print
Center
let's get Cpl util listening to all the
things that the print server does
that'll be one way of seeing whether
operations like creating a queue opening
a job work successfully so first thing
I'm going to do is I'm not going to
trust my typing we're going to start the
server and top has chiefly shows the
print server is now running so now we
can you can listen to service so what
we're doing now I mentioned earlier on
that print server is the nerve center of
the system so we're now listening on a
port to print server but we're finding
out everything that happens if user
creative jobs are printed if cues are
deleted etc so we're listening to print
server at this time what we're going to
do is we are going to run print Center
down here and we're going to add a
printer and I just happen to have down
here a USB printer it's on and hey
presto I can see it I can create a cue
for it and see a few things happen and
what you'll see in the CPL you to log is
you'll see that a cue has been created
you'll see the name of the cue and
you'll see another bunch of other
information this rather unused a
friendly string is the name of the cue
directory that we've created in vast
ball printing if you had appropriate
privileges you could navigate down there
go into that directory and you'd find a
bunch of files it's containing
information about the print queue and
the printer
the directories for the small files etc
we won't do that now and you don't
really need to do because CPL util is a
much easier way of finding out
information about the printer or the
print queue so we all them will stop
listening for a moment and we will will
ask it will usually get queue info
commands you have to type in everything
exactly as it's supposed to be otherwise
you recognize get queue info tells me a
little bit about the queue that I just
created let's see what we've got here
here we've got can everybody read this
it's not too big sorry about the
scrolling and the screen size but
basically here we've got the URL to the
printer module associated with this
queue down here we've got the URL to the
i/o module associated with this queue
further on if I can find it
we've got the URL to the print dialog
extension associated with his queue
we've got the name of the queue a bunch
of other information so you can if
especially if you drive a developer you
can use this sort of tools to make sure
everything got set up correctly so now
let's do something a little bit more
adventurous and we'll print a job and
we'll see what can happen so I will I'll
do listen to server again and okay so
we're now waiting for something to
happen let's go and find a job to print
let's do this one I'll print out the
other one later if you like so this is a
much more politically correct document
so let's print it and we're not going to
do much we're just going to print it
because we're actually seeing what Cpl
util does and if we're patient first of
all if we were down in print Center we
would see that the documents printing
sitting over here watching the the log
will actually wait for the print job to
go through and then we'll take a quick
look and you'll see there's basically a
sequence of messages that come through
it's pretty predictable sequence and
it's one way of finding out you know did
your job actually get through to it was
a small file created was the connection
to the printer successfully opened was
the job sent to the printer was the
connection closed etc so it's one way of
monitoring the entire lifecycle of a
print job did I mention that we were
going to work on printing performance
well maybe we are printing let's see the
thing to look for when you're looking at
this yes if you look at the event text
field that's basically the thing to look
for that tells you what sort of event
has happened so if you don't mind we'll
work backwards if you see down here
associated with event text we've got the
message that the jobs being deleted if
we go back your a message that says job
state changed that's on the next line
down print job completed looks pretty
good
closing printer connection whew progress
come our progress messages so it might
sound strange to go through this back
backwards but printing job opening
printer connection starting job job
created so that that's the
a healthy life cycle of a successful
print job and I know you won't believe
me but they page did actually print so
that Cpl util I there's a lot of stuff
in there that I could show you some of
it for some fairly brave people you have
to be appropriately privileged to do
some things like delete keys etc but if
you're suddenly if your printer driver
developer maybe for an application
developer certainly if you're a tester
Cpl utility is a tool that's available
and comes in handy sometimes so that's
all we've got for the demo so if you
switch over to the slides can you switch
over to the mean okay just going to
mention a couple of other tools related
to diagnosing printing problems just to
talk about how to deal with troublesome
PostScript jobs for a moment there's
basically two things that pretty easy to
use
the first thing is that we have a Poe
script error handler that you can
download with any print job if you pick
up PostScript printer in the print
dialog you'll find there's an error
handling panel shows up and in there you
can there's a radio button to print a
detailed report if anything goes wrong
if you click on that radio button error
handler gets downloaded with a job if
anything goes wrong and the printers
capable of doing it it'll print out a
stack gun it's exactly the same as the
same facility we had with laser a great
Mac OS 8 and 9 we don't yet but we will
soon have the ability to print post code
files to disk you can print PDFs pool
files to disk everybody knows but we're
still working on getting printer
PostScript working but there is a way of
getting PostScript files written to disk
certainly useful for developers and for
testers you can set some parameters in
your global defaults to turn on a
feature which we call job copy the first
invocation will
or tell us that you were on every
postscript print job written to the temp
directory
the second invocation will tell us that
you want those files written to a
directory of your choice you do have to
be careful to make sure those
directories are writable by everybody
because the writer of the PostScript
isn't running as your applications you I
did so be careful there but basically
when the job copy feature is turned on
every PostScript job gets written to
disk we Auto increment the filename if
needed and you then welcome to wade
through all the PostScript and see what
was going wrong especially if you're one
of these people who generate a lot of
your own post code so there's a useful
tools the last topic it's probably the
most controversial one talking about it
this year because it's important that we
emphasize the fact that the printing
system the graphic system the color sync
system far more tightly integrated on
ten than they ever were on Mac OS 8 9 or
its predecessors this is all good stuff
I mean it's much better than a
vertically integrated system but it does
have implications that has implications
for application developers and has
implications for printer driver
developers so I mentioned some of those
and first thing to talk about are the
main differences between printing on 10
versus printing on earlier versions of
the OS and first bullet item
applications can print and/or can draw
their pages in multiple color spaces
obviously a lot of Carbon applications
are going to be drawing in with
quick-draw and RGB but cocoa apps can
use any of the PDF color spaces and
think things will be drawn in you know
device colors device Caray RGB etc and
in device-independent CIE color spaces
so it's no longer a safe assumption if
you're a printer driver developer the
source material is going to be drawn in
our GB another thing that's different is
that
everything that goes into the PDFs pull
files automatically tagged obviously
it's nicer if the application does this
but if the application doesn't do it
we'll make sure that every shape in the
school file gets the profile and gets a
rendering intent if the application
hasn't done it for us
everything gets the system profile
images automatically get perceptual
everything else line art and text gets
relative colorimetric so the PDF spool
file we it's everything has a source
profile and that it's definitely
different from the way things typically
worked on Mac OS 8 and 9 should
emphasize the fact that this is all
we'll be talking about source profiles
here we've got a quite a nice clean
dividing line between what happens in
spalling which is the domain of the
graphic system and the application what
happens a rendering time which is
obviously the domain of the graphic
system and printer drivers printer
drivers don't get to control the tagging
of anything with source profiles and
they certainly don't get to control
rendering intents so in print drivers on
10 you won't see color panels offering
rendering intent options that's all
handled upstream when the pool when the
spool file is created it also falls out
from this that obviously we want good
culling profiles in the system not just
for printers for displays scanners any
sort of input device
so obviously this everything's going to
work just fine if there's accurate and
versatile profiles for all the devices
involved in the printing pipeline and of
the printers need to have profiles and
we obviously work with the print vendors
to encourage them to develop good
quality profiles the printer modules
down on the back end actually provide
their profiles when akyz created we ask
the printer printer module to tell us
about the destination profile
[Music]
I'll talk a little bit more about that
on the next slide the final bullet item
sounds a little controversial to some
folks basically no way to turn off color
matching the simplification basically
there's there's only one scenario in
which color values are not changed and
that's when the source and the
destination profiles are identical in
all other cases that the applications
drawing in a different color space from
the one specified by the printer module
we have to match so the couple sinks CMM
gets in there and does its thing so
typically if everybody's doing the right
thing if if everything's being tagged
there's a good chance that color data
will be managed through the printing
system and printer modules will get data
that's being matched once it's matched
what's PDF is rendered and shape
specific information is lost so there
are implications for printer drivers in
connection with that so let's talk about
raster printing for a moment so although
everything gets color matched it's not
to say the printer drivers don't have a
lot to do with final print quality
output and color fidelity there's a
couple of things they can do here first
one there's an image access callback
it's probably not as powerful as it
needs to be and we'll be working on it
but basically this is a callback that
enables printer modules to get a image
data sampled image data before it's
rendered so they get an opportunity to
do edge enhancement resample images
color balance adjustment whatever if
they need to do that and want to do that
before the PDF page is rendered to make
this system shine and to make it just a
great color platform we want every
printed route from the driver developer
to provide accurate versatile profiles
it's most important of course that they
cover all the permutations of all the
media types are supported by the printer
or the print quality modes it's
recommended that those profiles include
profile connections base tags so we can
demise the number of transitions or
transformations that happen when we're
doing our color matching so it's very
important that we get good quality
profiles for all the printers on 10 now
remember I said that there is a scenario
where data can go through unmatched in
that case printer module could apply its
own color science there's there's really
two options for printing modules when
they tell the converter what sort of
data they want they can emit profile
reference in which case we have to make
an assumption we have that assumption is
that the destination profile is the
system profile and we will know if it
matches the source profile will do
nothing but otherwise we will render to
the system profiles color space it's not
great because system profile generally
doesn't have different conversion
mechanisms or generally has the same
conversion mechanism for different
rendering intents but that the printer
module could get data rendered to the
system profile and then apply its own
color science better than that actually
is for the printer module to give us a
profile that represents a wide gamut
color space and we will render to that
space and from that point on the printer
module could provide or could execute
its own proprietary table based color
matching to the to the printer device so
generally speaking to enable vendor
specific color matching would recommend
that the printer module provides this
wide gamut profile as a destination
space and it's a fairly complicated
topic I'm sorry only sort of touching
the surface of it we are working on a
tech note and hopefully in a few weeks
or a month or two we'll have a new tech
note out it explains color matching on
10 with respect to printing
I need to mention PostScript quickly the
the simple way of saying this is that
color PostScript printing is handled on
10 exactly the way it was on with laser
hydrate on 8 and 9 if you pick
PostScript matching and the printers
default because what we do is we turn
all the source profiles in the PDF spool
file into color space in vacations send
them down in the print job to the
printer use the printers own embedded
color rendering dictionary as a
destination color space and let the
PostScript machinery do the color
matching we will probably in a future
release allow host-based profiles to be
converted to host based printer profiles
to be converted to a couple spaces and
sent down to the printer so we don't
have to use the printers own CID in the
case where you've got a calibrated
profile that's for the future and that
is all I have to say about printing in
color just quickly the three follow-on
sessions that we'd like you to go to
after this if you're a Coco person go to
the advanced cocoa Topic session
tomorrow morning David is wandering
around there it's going to tell you all
about how quick-draw and quartz 2ds
going to come together that if you've
recovered from the beer bash tonight in
time get up and go to the 9 a.m. session
and last but not least there's a
feedback forum tomorrow afternoon for I
guess all your questions about graphics
color printing and related technologies
and with that I'm going to hand you back
to Travis
thank you Paul okay what I want to do is
give you my contact information we
obviously hit you with a lot of
information then today's session if you
have any further questions feel free to
email me at Travis B at Apple comm this
extends for both printing and any of the
2d graphic technologies there in Mac OS